Alight.
So, let's talk about creating and using interfaces with default methods.
Before Java 8, the only kind of method you could have on an interface
was the abstract method.
Because of this, any additional method added to the interface
would force implementing classes to be refactored.
This limited the ability of interfaces to evolve
over time to support additional features or provide additional functionality.
Default methods were introduced to interfaces with the release of Java 8
for the purpose of allowing you to add new functionality
to an existing interface, allowing it to evolve,
without forcing refactoring of existing code.
Default methods are sometimes also called defender methods
or virtual extension methods
as they were originally referred to in a 2011 paper by Brian Goetz,
Java Language Architect, at oracle.
You specify a default method with the ‘default’ keyword
at the beginning of the method signature.
Remember that all method declarations in an interface
are implicitly public,
and this also applies to the default method,
so the ‘public’ modifier would be redundant, and therefore, generally omitted
(though it could appear in an exam question).
You cannot declare a default method with any other access modifier, protected or private.
You cannot use synchronized or final keywords with the default method declaration.
Alright, so let's swing back over to intellij.
And you can see here, what I've done is I've created a new project
with this section called InterfaceMethods.
We're going to start by creating a new interface type named Defaultable.
Let's go ahead and do that.
Defaultable,
interface, doesn't really matter because I'm going to paste in the code.
And I'll paste in the new code there.
Alright, this code as you can see is pretty simple.
I've declared a public interface Defaultable,
which has a field abstractvalue of top String.
I've also defined an abstract method called abstractMethod.
Note here that I'm not using the ‘abstract’ keyword,
it's only required on an abstract method declared on an abstract class.
And I've also got a default method called defaultNotAbstractMethod
and that does include a method body. So, if we build this code,
you can see that build's fine. There's currently no output,
what I want to do, now that I've built that,
is use the Javap tool which allows us to disassemble the class file
to look at what's been generated from this file.
So, we're going to open a terminal session as we've done previously,
in this folder, InterfaceMethods. So, I'm going to right-click that >
Open in Terminal, give ourselves a bit of space to see,
I'm going to type Javap Defaultable.
Now looking at the output from the javap command there,
you can see that the field I declared
which looked like a regular old class attribute
is a public static final constant field that's abstract value.
And the abstract method, the body-less method here,
is shown with both public and abstract modifiers.
And then, we've got public default void for our defaultNotAbstractMethod that did have a body.
Right, so now that we've seen that. Let's do something with this interface.
What I want to do is add two packaged private classes in the same source file
as the Defaultable interface.
So, I'm going to exit this, go back to our code#,
and I want to paste some new code right at the bottom
outside of, or after the closing right curly brace
for our interface. So, you can see what I've added here now.
So, there's our interface, you scroll down and have a look at what I've pasted in.
So, I've added two classes here, the first one ImplementingClass
implements the Defaultable interface
and overrides the abstract method we called abstractMethod.
So, moving on, down to the next class DefaultClass that's got two methods.
Right, so the first method down here called abstractMethod,
takes an object of type defaultable as a parameter
and executes the abstractMethod on the object passed as the parameter.
The second method was our main method there,
and that creates an instance of the current class,
it executes the callAbstractMethod, passing it an instance of implementing class.
And it then executes the callAbstractMethod passing at a lambda expression.
I covered lambda expressions in my 10Z-819 Part 1 Course here on Udemy,
refer to the Programming Abstractly through Interfaces section,
where you'll find a number of videos about lambda expressions.
I'll be talking a lot more about them in this course.
I've included an example here to demonstrate the implications
of an evolving interface to code which might unknowingly
even be a consumer of an interface.
Alright.
So, if we run this code now.
We can see the output down the bottom there.
Right, so now that we've done that, let's add an additional abstractMethod
to the interface Defaultable.
I'll leave that down here,
you can see what's happened there, that's produced a compiler error.
We have a look over here,
and not only is the error in the ImplementingClass,
which is an obvious derivative and needs refactoring
but also the method invocation, using the lambda expression down here
which is a much less obvious consumer.
Hopefully, you'll remember that lambda expressions require an interface
to be a functional interface and contain only one abstractMethod.
Default methods allow you to keep this standard but offer additional functionality.
Just to confirm the error there,
Multiple non-overriding abstract methods found interface Defaultable.
Back up here,
class ImplementingClass must either be declared abstract implement the abstract
method another abstractMethod that we just added.
Alright.
So, let's remove this second abstractMethod
from the Defaultable interface.
Of course, the errors disappear.
This was a simple example of how an interface prior to Java 8
made evolution of the interface very difficult.
A whole series of utility classes grew up around interfaces
to add functionality useful to implementing classes,
that were not possible to add to the interface itself
in the earlier Java releases.
Java.util.collections class is one example,
which we'll be reviewing in a future video in this course.
You can add new default methods without forcing implementations to be refactored.
I've already said that the default method is public
and can't be abstract, final, or synchronized.
Any class implementing the interface is not required to override the method.
Older code can ignore the new functionality,
and future code can use or extend the functionality
offered by the default method.
One interesting limitation on default methods
is that you can't declare a default method that would override
any of java.lang.Objects public methods.
Let's demonstrate that we're going to paste the new method here in our
Defaultable interface.
We're trying to override your string there.
Default method ‘toString’ overrides a member of java.lang.Object, and it's not allowing us to do that.
That's the reason why we've got that compiler error.
You can't declare a default method, that's considered an override equivalent,
with a non-private method of object because any class implementing the interface
will inherit its own implementation of the method.
Let's just undo that.
So, next, let's create a base class which contains a method with the same
signature as the default method on the interface Defaultable.
I'm going to add the following source, I'm about to paste
to the same source forward down the bottom here.
You see I've created a BaseClass that has a method with the same signature default method
in the interface, defaultNotAbstractMethod.
If I go back up to our DefaultClass,
I'll change that change the definition of DefaultClass
to use the BaseClass and implement defaultable.
I'm just going to paste that,
so you can see there, I'm extending BaseClass and implementing defaultable.
You can see, we've clearly got an error there. But if I now go down
and add another method here to our DefaultClass,
public void abstractMethod,
you can see that the code now compiles.
Did that surprise you?
The Defaultable interface has a default method that has the same signature
as the method in BaseClass defaultNotAbstractMethod.
So, you can see we've got defaultNotAbstractMethod in BaseClass,
and also in our interface, we've got the same on line 14.
Our DefaultClass
implements the interface and extends the BaseClass.
So, why doesn't this cause a method clash?
So, let's add some more code to the main method of DefaultClass
up here. Let this wrote as the last line.
Let's see what happens when we run this,
so the output
proves that it wasn't the interface's default method that was invoked,
but the DefaultClasses method of the same signature.
So why is that?
Well, the javaagent gives precedence to the method declared in the superclass.
If a class in the superclass chain has a declaration for a method,
concrete or abstract,
that has the same signature as an implemented interface
the superclass method is used.
Alright, so the video has gone on for long enough. So, let's end the video here.
And in the next video, I want to pursue this line of testing a bit more.
So, I'll see you in the next video!